.TH surf 1 "Mar 31 2000"

.SH NAME
surf \- visualization of algebraic curves and surfaces

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B surf
.B \|\-n\||\|\-\-nogui
.IR file \ .\|.\|.
.br
.B surf
.RI [\| Gtk
.IR options \|]
.RB [\|[\| \-x \||\| \-\-exec \|]
.IR file \ .\|.\|.\|]
.br
.B surf
.B \|\-\-help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B surf
is a tool to render algebraic curves and surfaces. It is script driven
and has (optionally) a nifty graphical user interface using the Gtk
widget set.

The only input needed is the equation of an algebraic curve/surface in
everyday mathematical notation. The output is a (series of) color or
black and white image(s) in one of several file formats.

.B surf
also provides a C-style command language which helps working out more
complicated equations.

The resolution of an image is only bounded by the available
memory. Since the image is stored as an array of floats and because some
image processing algorithms need a copy of the image, you need at least
width*height*12 bytes of virtual memory.

.B surf
can handle curves/surfaces up to degree 30. The main features include
.B algebraic
.BR curves ,
.B algebraic
.BR surfaces ,
.B hyper plane
.BR sections ,
.B lines on
.BR surfaces ,
.B multiple
.BR curves/surfaces ,
.B adaptive anti aliasing
and
.BR dithering .

.SH OPTIONS
If you run
.B surf
with GUI support (i.\|e. without the
.B \-n\||\|\-\-nogui
option) the standard
.I Gtk options
are recognized.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-nogui
Run without a graphical user interface, just execute the scripts
given as
.IR file s
and exit thereafter.

In case
.B surf
has been compiled without GUI support this option does nothing and
scripts are always executed non-interactively.

.TP
.B \-x, \-\-exec
Execute scripts passed as
.IR file s
immediately. Otherwise the scripts are just loaded, not executed.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display usage information.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C)
1996\-1997 Friedrich Alexander Universitaet Erlangen-Nuernberg,
1997\-2000 Johannes Gutenberg-Universitaet Mainz

.SH AUTHORS
Stephan Endrass, Hans Huelf, Ruediger Oertel, Kai Schneider,
Ralf Schmitt, Johannes Beigel
